# Validation
GenFx provides a rich validation system for ensuring the configuration of your genetic algorithm is in the expected state.

## Component Property Validation
All components have the ability to have their public properties validated by GenFx.  Each property can use the GenFx API to validate its own state and each component also has validation logic to validate all of its properties when it is used by a genetic algorithm.

### Validators
There are two types of validators that GenFx provides:
* *Property validator*: This validator applies to a single property of a component.  It validates the value of a property according to its validation logic.  Properties can be validated when set by calling the [GeneticComponent.ValidateProperty](xref:GenFx.GeneticComponent.ValidateProperty(System.Object,System.String)) method or [GeneticComponent.SetProperty](xref:GenFx.GeneticComponent.SetProperty``1(``0@,``0,System.String)) method which implicitly executes validation. In addition, all component properties are validated during initialization of the GA.
* *Component validator*: This validator applies to a component as a whole.  It's not tied to a specific property; rather, it is most often used to validate multiple properties that are dependent on each other.  For example, if property A depends on property B's value in order to determine its validity, then a component validator would be appropriate to use in that case rather than property validators on each property.  If you were to only use property validators in that scenario, property A might be set before property B and the value of property B might yield an invalid value for property A when property A is set. You wouldn't want a validation exception to be thrown at that point since property B wasn't given the chance to be set to its appropriate value.  By using a component validator, validation of the entire component's state doesn't occur until GA initialization.

GenFx validates properties and components through the use of validator attributes.  These are attributes that can be placed on a property or component class which indicate how that property or component should be validated.  For example, the [RequiredValidatorAttribute](xref:GenFx.Validation.RequiredValidatorAttribute) ensures that the property is not set to a null value.  GenFx even allows you to author your own validator (and attribute, if you wish) to provide your own custom validation logic (see the [Custom Validator tutorial](../tutorials/custom_validator.md)).  To see which validation attributes are provided by GenFx, check them out at the [Validation namespace](xref:GenFx.Validation).

### External Component Validation
GenFx provides a way to validate the configuration of other components when a particular component is being used. This allows you to ensure a component that you depend upon is configured in the way that is required by your commponent.  For example, if you've implemented a crossover operator that requires a binary string entity of a certain length, you can attach an external validator attribute to your crossover operator class that defines this validation requirement.  Every validator attribute that is defined by GenFx also includes a version of that attribute which provides external component validation.  See the [Validation namespace](xref:GenFx.Validation).

## Required Component Types
Often times it is necessary to ensure that a specific component is used in conjunction with another component.  For example, if you've defined your own crossover operator for binary strings, you want to ensure that only binary string entities are used in the genetic algorithm.  GenFx provides validation attributes that allow you to define this type of requirement. See the [Validation namespace](xref:GenFx.Validation).